The $\bf{X2000}$ is an ABB train design that employs active car-body tilt and steerable truck technology to traverse curves at higher 
speeds than would be achievable by conventional designs without 
compromising passenger comfort and safety.
Developed for the Swedish State Railways (SJ), the specification 
was designed to provide a train that would allow SJ to increase 
average speeds thus reducing trip times without the need for the 
building of a completely new track with a new route alignment.
The X2000 is the result of 20 years of effort researching 
effective means of instituting coach tilting and truck steering 
in curves. A wide variety of configurations and tests were 
conducted over the years utilizing a test car identified as X15.
In 1970, the program was initiated with theoretical research into 
tilt trains and radial trucks. Following this, an existing 
electric multiple-unit train, the X15, was fitted with a series 
of experimental trucks and tilt systems. Trials with this train 
were carried out between 1975 and 1982. These trials included 
extensive tests of passenger reaction to tilting, leading to the 
conclusion that the partial tilt, not fully compensating for cant 
deficiency, is preferable to full compensation.
By utilizing existing track with certain upgrades of the track 
structure and signaling system, SJ has chosen to trade off higher 
maximum speeds, 200 km/h vs. 300 km/h (125 mph vs. 186 mph), that 
would be attainable with other current high-speed train 
technology such as the French TGV developed by French National 
Railways, SNCF, and the German ICE developed by the German 
Federal Railway, DB, for lower track costs. Although both the 
TGV and ICE technologies can operate on existing non-high-speed 
rail lines, operation at their maximum revenue speeds requires a 
track structure that is more limited in its maximum curvature and 
that must be completely grade separated at all crossings with
Page 3
other modes. Thus more extensive rebuilding of existing track 
or, in some cases, completely new right-of-ways is required for 
the TGV and ICE to reach their full speed potentials.
In August of 1986, after review of various proposals to meet S J ' s 
specifications, ABB was chosen to deliver 20 high-speed tilt-body 
consists. Each consist contains a power car, four trailing cars, 
and a driving trailer (see Figure 2). The order by SJ included 
responsibility for fulfillment of performance reliability and 
prescribed levels of operational and maintenance costs. These 
consists will initially serve the 456 km (284 mile) Stockholm to 
Gothenburg line in under 3 hours (after all signaling upgrades 
are completed). Service started in September of 1990 with one 
trainset. The second trainset is to be delivered to SJ from ABB 
in December 1990, with subsequent delivery of a trainset every 
other month. SJ plans to utilize the X2000 on other corridors if 
it proves as successful as current ridership projections 
indicate.
SJ feels the X2000 presents ah option for improved rail service 
that is affordable. Pricing of the initial service will be 
somewhere between current rail and air fares. SJ is considering 
offering only first-class service on the initial trains and thus 
providing a level of comfort anticipated to be higher than the 
best air service. The one consist in operation has already had 
one second-class car replaced with a first-class car due to 
demand for this premium service.
