# X2000

The $\bf{X2000}$ is an ABB train design that employs active car-body tilt and steerable truck technology to traverse curves at higher speeds than would be achievable by conventional designs without 
compromising passenger comfort and safety.
Developed for the Swedish State Railways (SJ), the specification 
was designed to provide a train that would allow SJ to increase 
average speeds thus reducing trip times without the need for the 
building of a completely new track with a new route alignment.
The X2000 is the result of 20 years of effort researching 
effective means of instituting coach tilting and truck steering 
in curves. A wide variety of configurations and tests were 
conducted over the years utilizing a test car identified as X15.
In 1970, the program was initiated with theoretical research into 
tilt trains and radial trucks. Following this, an existing 
electric multiple-unit train, the X15, was fitted with a series 
of experimental trucks and tilt systems. Trials with this train 
were carried out between 1975 and 1982. These trials included 
extensive tests of passenger reaction to tilting, leading to the 
conclusion that the partial tilt, not fully compensating for cant 
deficiency, is preferable to full compensation.
By utilizing existing track with certain upgrades of the track 
structure and signaling system, SJ has chosen to trade off higher 
maximum speeds, 200 km/h vs. 300 km/h (125 mph vs. 186 mph), that 
would be attainable with other current high-speed train 
technology such as the French TGV developed by French National 
Railways, SNCF, and the German ICE developed by the German 
Federal Railway, DB, for lower track costs. Although both the 
TGV and ICE technologies can operate on existing non-high-speed 
rail lines, operation at their maximum revenue speeds requires a 
track structure that is more limited in its maximum curvature and 
that must be completely grade separated at all crossings with
other modes. Thus more extensive rebuilding of existing track 
or, in some cases, completely new right-of-ways is required for 
the TGV and ICE to reach their full speed potentials.
In August of 1986, after review of various proposals to meet S J ' s 
specifications, ABB was chosen to deliver 20 high-speed tilt-body 
consists. Each consist contains a power car, four trailing cars, 
and a driving trailer (see Figure 2). The order by SJ included 
responsibility for fulfillment of performance reliability and 
prescribed levels of operational and maintenance costs. These 
consists will initially serve the 456 km (284 mile) Stockholm to 
Gothenburg line in under 3 hours (after all signaling upgrades 
are completed). Service started in September of 1990 with one 
trainset. The second trainset is to be delivered to SJ from ABB 
in December 1990, with subsequent delivery of a trainset every 
other month. SJ plans to utilize the X2000 on other corridors if 
it proves as successful as current ridership projections 
indicate.
SJ feels the X2000 presents ah option for improved rail service 
that is affordable. Pricing of the initial service will be 
somewhere between current rail and air fares. SJ is considering 
offering only first-class service on the initial trains and thus 
providing a level of comfort anticipated to be higher than the 
best air service. The one consist in operation has already had 
one second-class car replaced with a first-class car due to 
demand for this premium service.


X2000是瑞典在上世纪80年代研发的高速摆式电力动车组。在 1996 年 11 月，广深铁路向瑞典 ADTranz 租用一列 X2000 ，租期两年，以提高广深线上的列车服务质素和运行速度，同时也尝试以最短时间及最快速度掌握到 X 2000 的摆式技术，及测试摆式列车在中国的可行性。列车于 1998 年初运抵中国天津，被命名为“新时速”。与在瑞典的 X2000 列车相比较， 这列车辆种类和编组与在瑞典的大为不一样，除了涂装以外，中国版的列车上并没有配置餐吧车，列车编组为一动 6 拖；而且采用的工作电压为 25kv。 新时速以 X2K 型为原型的列车。列车到达后就被送往北京环铁进行试跑。同年的 8 月，列车在广深铁路开始了为期约 10 天的正线试验运行，试验完毕后，随即在当月展开商业运营。并担负广州，深圳和九龙的客运服务。租期届满后 ，广深铁路把整组 X2000 买下，并继续为广深九线服务 直至 2007 年。 X2000 在广深线上运行期间，除了香港的 KTT 列车以外，曾是内地铁路线上运行等级最高的客运列车；其商业运营速度和技术含量也是最高的。当时也有不少乘客为了能享受这些高等级的服务和享受，出门时还特地挑选这列车来乘坐。当然也有不少外地火车迷特地到广州或者深圳来感受这列全国独一无二的列车。纵使当时广深线上还有 8 组国产 “蓝箭”动车组配合其运行，但其独特的地位一直没有被削弱。

后来，因为广深线上的信号改造和升级， X2000 的车载信号系统已经不能与新线路信号系统相兼容，再加上那时刚好是 CRH1 （和谐 1 ）型动车组在广深线上的开始大规模的使用， X2000 列车最终被停运，并搁置在车库内，不久就接到命令列车要被调往成都铁路局，列车并在 2007 年的 9 月运抵重庆，并预计在同年的 11 月投入成渝线的客运服务，但是后来列车却迟迟未见上线运营。有消息指是后来因为当地的工作人员违规操作造成列车车辆轮对被拖坏，由于 X2000 列车的维护费在中国来说还是用十分的高昂，有些检修的项目还是得请瑞典的技术人员过来才得以解决，四川成都局根本无力对其进行维修；列车的再上线运行的计划再次被搁置。 2008 年 5 月的大地震， 成都铁路局局方还要重建四川省内的铁路 ( 因宝成铁路、成昆铁路及相关支线线路 ( 由成都铁路局局方管辖路段 ) 多处塌方而要急于重修 ) ，据闻这更使局方无望对列车进行维修与保养，而最终要退还予广深铁路。

最终在经历了一年多的异地搁置， X2000 列车最终在 2008 年 12 月 21 日被运返广州。有消息指列车会被瑞典国铁（ SJ ）返购，如果事实如此，那么这列 X2000 的经历不能不说是“戏剧性”的。
